Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the spinal cord,
reflexes and muscle tone. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the structure of a reflex arc and the nature of reflexes.
A reflex is an automatic, stereotyped response to a stimulus,
mediated by a defined neural pathway, the reflex arc,
and the concept is fundamental to the function of the nervous system,
the reflex being its elementary unit of behaviour, so it is worth describing.
A reflex is an involuntary, rapid and stereotyped response to a particular
stimulus, occurring without the need for conscious thought.
It is mediated by a reflex arc, which has, in its basic form, five components:
a receptor, which detects the stimulus; an afferent, sensory neuron,
which carries the signal to the central nervous system; an integrating centre,
in the spinal cord or brainstem, where the signal is processed — in the simplest
reflexes a single synapse, in others involving interneurons; an efferent,
motor neuron, which carries the command out; and an effector,
the muscle or gland that produces the response.
Reflexes vary in complexity, from the simplest,
with one synapse — monosynaptic — to more complex, multisynaptic ones.
They serve protective and regulatory functions,
and form the building blocks of more complex behaviour and of the control of
posture and movement.
So a reflex is an automatic, stereotyped response mediated by a reflex arc of five
components — receptor, afferent neuron, integrating centre, efferent neuron,
and effector — ranging from monosynaptic to multisynaptic;
serving protective and regulatory functions and forming the elementary units of
nervous function and the control of movement.
Describe the stretch reflex and the muscle spindle.
The stretch reflex is the simplest reflex,
and it is fundamental to the maintenance of muscle tone and posture,
depending on the muscle spindle as its receptor,
so it is worth describing in some detail.
The stretch reflex is the reflex contraction of a muscle in response to its being
stretched. Its receptor is the muscle spindle, which lies within the muscle,
parallel to its fibres, and senses the muscle's length and rate of stretch.
When the muscle is stretched, the spindle is stretched and excited;
it sends impulses, by a fast sensory afferent, into the spinal cord,
where the afferent synapses directly — monosynaptically — on the lower motor
neurons of the same muscle, exciting them; these then cause the muscle to contract,
opposing the stretch.
So the reflex resists the lengthening of the muscle.
This is the basis of the tendon-jerk reflexes tested clinically — such as the knee
jerk — in which a tap on the tendon briefly stretches the muscle,
evoking a reflex contraction.
The stretch reflex maintains muscle tone and contributes to posture,
automatically resisting the forces that would lengthen the muscles and cause
collapse.
So the stretch reflex is the reflex contraction of a muscle when stretched:
the muscle spindle, sensing the stretch,
excites — monosynaptically — the motor neurons of the same muscle,
causing it to contract and resist the stretch;
the basis of the clinical tendon jerks,
and a reflex maintaining muscle tone and posture by resisting the lengthening of
muscles.
Describe the role of the gamma motor neurons and the maintenance of spindle
sensitivity.
The muscle spindle would lose its usefulness as the muscle shortened,
were it not for a special mechanism — the gamma motor neuron system — which
maintains its sensitivity, and understanding this completes the account of the
stretch reflex and of motor control.
The problem is this: the muscle spindle senses stretch of its central region;
but when the whole muscle contracts and shortens,
the spindle within it would go slack, and so stop sensing,
becoming unable to detect further changes in length — just when it is needed.
This is prevented by the gamma motor neurons.
Besides the large alpha motor neurons that drive the main,
force-producing muscle fibres, there are smaller gamma motor neurons that innervate
the contractile ends of the spindle's own intrafusal fibres.
When the muscle contracts, the gamma motor neurons are activated together with the
alpha — alpha-gamma co-activation — so that the ends of the spindle contract too,
taking up the slack and keeping the sensory region taut and sensitive across the
range of muscle length.
By setting the gamma activity, the nervous system also sets the sensitivity,
or bias, of the stretch reflex, adjusting muscle tone.
So the gamma motor neurons innervate the contractile ends of the spindle's
intrafusal fibres, and are co-activated with the alpha motor neurons during
contraction, taking up the slack and keeping the spindle taut and sensitive as the
muscle shortens; and, by setting the gamma activity,
the nervous system sets the sensitivity of the stretch reflex and the muscle tone —
a mechanism essential to the spindle's function and to motor control.
Describe the Golgi tendon organ and the inverse stretch reflex.
Alongside the muscle spindle, which senses length,
the Golgi tendon organ senses tension,
and it mediates a reflex complementary to the stretch reflex,
the two together giving the nervous system information about both the length and
the force of the muscle, so it is worth describing.
The Golgi tendon organ is a sensory receptor located in the tendon,
at the junction of the muscle and tendon, in series with the muscle fibres.
Because it is in series, it senses the tension, or force,
in the muscle and its tendon — whether produced by stretch or by contraction — in
contrast to the spindle, which, lying in parallel, senses length.
When the muscle tension rises, the tendon organ is excited,
and sends impulses into the spinal cord, where, through an inhibitory interneuron,
it inhibits the motor neurons of the same muscle — so it tends to cause the muscle
to relax when the tension is high.
This is the inverse stretch reflex, or autogenic inhibition.
Its function is partly protective — guarding against excessive tension that might
damage the muscle or tendon — and partly regulatory,
contributing to the smooth control of muscle force and tension.
So the Golgi tendon organ, in the tendon in series with the muscle,
senses muscle tension, and, through an inhibitory interneuron,
inhibits the muscle's own motor neurons when tension is high — the inverse stretch
reflex, or autogenic inhibition; protecting against excessive tension and helping
to regulate muscle force, and, with the length-sensing spindle,
giving the nervous system information on both the length and the force of the
muscle.
Describe the flexion withdrawal and crossed extensor reflexes.
The flexion withdrawal reflex, with its associated crossed extensor reflex,
is a protective polysynaptic reflex that illustrates the integrative capacity of
the spinal cord, coordinating the response of several muscle groups,
so it is worth describing.
The flexion withdrawal reflex is the reflex withdrawal of a limb from a painful or
noxious stimulus — as when one treads on a sharp object and the leg is rapidly
flexed to withdraw the foot.
The stimulus, detected by nociceptors, sends impulses into the spinal cord, where,
through several interneurons — it is polysynaptic — the signal excites the flexor
muscles of the limb and, by reciprocal inhibition, inhibits the extensors,
so that the limb flexes and withdraws from the danger.
It is protective.
When the reflex occurs in a weight-bearing leg,
a complementary response occurs in the opposite leg: the crossed extensor reflex,
in which the opposite limb extends,
to support the body's weight as the stimulated limb is withdrawn — the signal
crossing the cord to excite the extensors and inhibit the flexors of the other side.
This coordination of flexion on one side with extension on the other illustrates
the integrative organisation of the spinal cord.
So the flexion withdrawal reflex withdraws a limb from a noxious stimulus by a
polysynaptic pathway exciting the flexors and inhibiting the extensors;
and the crossed extensor reflex simultaneously extends the opposite limb to bear
the weight — a protective, coordinated reflex illustrating the integrative capacity
of the spinal cord to organise the response of several muscle groups.
Describe reciprocal innervation and the role of spinal interneurons.
The smooth operation of reflexes and movements requires that,
when one muscle is activated, its antagonist is relaxed,
and this is achieved by reciprocal innervation,
mediated by the spinal interneurons,
whose role in organising motor output is worth describing.
Reciprocal innervation, or reciprocal inhibition,
is the arrangement by which the activation of a muscle is accompanied by the
inhibition of its antagonist — the muscle that would oppose the movement.
So, in the stretch reflex, when the stretched muscle is excited to contract,
its antagonist is simultaneously inhibited, so as not to oppose the contraction;
and in voluntary movement likewise.
This is mediated by inhibitory interneurons in the spinal cord, which,
when the agonist's motor neurons are excited,
are driven to inhibit the antagonist's motor neurons.
More generally, the spinal cord contains a rich array of interneurons,
which are not simple relays but perform much of the integration and coordination of
motor output: they mediate reciprocal inhibition,
distribute and coordinate reflexes across muscle groups,
and are the targets of the descending pathways,
which act largely through them to control movement.
The Renshaw cells, providing recurrent inhibition of motor neurons, are one example.
So reciprocal innervation — the inhibition of the antagonist when a muscle is
activated — is mediated by inhibitory spinal interneurons;
and the spinal interneurons more generally perform much of the integration and
coordination of motor output, mediating reflexes and serving as the targets of the
descending pathways — the spinal machinery organising movement and reflexes.
Describe muscle tone and its regulation, and the changes in disease.
Muscle tone — the continuous, slight tension present in resting muscle — is
important for posture and as a substrate for movement, and its regulation,
and the characteristic ways it is disturbed in disease,
follow from the reflex mechanisms we have described,
so it is worth drawing together.
Muscle tone is the resistance of a muscle to passive stretch, present even at rest,
arising largely from the stretch reflex: the muscle spindles, sensing any stretch,
maintain a background level of reflex contraction, giving the muscle its tone.
The level of tone is set by the activity in this reflex,
which is influenced by the gamma motor neurons setting the spindle sensitivity,
and by the descending pathways from the brainstem,
which regulate the excitability of the reflex — some facilitating and some
inhibiting it.
So tone is under both spinal and descending control.
Disorders of tone are characteristic of particular lesions.
An upper motor neuron lesion releases the stretch reflex from descending
inhibition, causing increased tone — spasticity,
with its characteristic velocity-dependent quality.
A lower motor neuron lesion abolishes the reflex, causing loss of tone — flaccidity.
Basal ganglia disorders cause a different increase in tone — rigidity.
Cerebellar disorders cause reduced tone, hypotonia.
So muscle tone is the resting resistance to stretch,
arising from the stretch reflex maintained by the spindles,
and set by the gamma neurons and the descending pathways;
its disorders being characteristic — spasticity from upper motor neuron lesions
releasing the reflex, flaccidity from lower motor neuron lesions abolishing it,
rigidity from basal ganglia disorders,
and hypotonia from cerebellar disease — disturbances following from the reflex
mechanisms and useful in localisation.
Pull it together: how does the spinal cord integrate reflexes and motor control?
I would draw it together around the spinal cord as far more than a cable carrying
signals — as an integrating centre that, through its reflexes and interneurons,
performs much of the moment-to-moment control of movement and posture,
under the guidance of the brain.
At the heart of the cord's motor function is the lower motor neuron,
the final common path, on which everything converges.
Around it, the cord contains the circuitry for the reflexes: the stretch reflex,
through the spindle, maintaining tone and posture and resisting stretch,
its sensitivity set by the gamma system; the inverse stretch reflex,
through the tendon organ, regulating and protecting against tension;
and the protective flexion withdrawal and crossed extensor reflexes,
coordinating the limbs.
The interneurons, mediating reciprocal inhibition and coordinating reflexes across
muscle groups, perform much of the integration.
The descending pathways from the brain act largely upon this spinal machinery — on
the interneurons and the gamma and alpha motor neurons — to initiate and control
movement and to set the tone, rather than commanding each muscle directly.
So the cord integrates posture, reflex protection and the substrate of movement,
ready to be directed by the brain.
So the spinal cord integrates motor control through the lower motor neuron — the
final common path — and its reflexes and interneurons:
the stretch reflex maintaining tone and posture,
the tendon-organ reflex regulating tension, the withdrawal reflexes protecting,
and the interneurons coordinating; the descending pathways acting upon this spinal
machinery to control movement — the cord being an integrating centre,
not a mere conduit, central to movement and posture.
Describe the Renshaw cells and recurrent inhibition.
Among the spinal interneurons, the Renshaw cells provide a particular form of
feedback inhibition of the motor neurons — recurrent inhibition — and understanding
this illustrates the local regulation of motor neuron activity within the cord.
The Renshaw cell is an inhibitory interneuron in the ventral horn of the spinal
cord, connected in a feedback loop with the motor neurons.
The arrangement is this: as a motor neuron fires and sends its impulse out towards
the muscle, its axon gives off a branch — a collateral — within the cord,
which excites the Renshaw cell; the Renshaw cell, in turn,
inhibits that same motor neuron and its neighbours.
So the motor neuron, by firing, activates a cell that inhibits it — a negative
feedback, or recurrent inhibition.
The functions of this recurrent inhibition are thought to include the stabilising
and smoothing of motor neuron firing, limiting excessive or runaway activity;
the sharpening of motor output, by the more strongly active motor neurons
inhibiting their less active neighbours, focusing the activity;
and a contribution to the regulation of the gain of the motor output.
The Renshaw cells are themselves subject to control from the descending pathways.
So the Renshaw cells are inhibitory interneurons forming a recurrent,
feedback loop: a firing motor neuron, through an axon collateral,
excites the Renshaw cell, which inhibits that same motor neuron and its neighbours
— recurrent inhibition; functioning to stabilise and smooth motor neuron firing,
sharpen the output by lateral inhibition, and regulate its gain,
under descending control — a local feedback regulation of motor neuron activity
within the cord.
Describe alpha-gamma co-activation and the gamma loop in more detail.
The control of movement involves not only the direct activation of the muscle by
the alpha motor neurons but the coordinated activity of the gamma system,
and the concepts of alpha-gamma co-activation and the gamma loop are worth
examining as mechanisms by which the nervous system controls movement through the
spindle.
The muscle is driven by the alpha motor neurons,
which contract the main muscle fibres,
while the gamma motor neurons set the sensitivity of the muscle spindles,
as discussed.
In voluntary movement, the alpha and gamma motor neurons are usually activated
together — alpha-gamma co-activation: as the alpha neurons contract the muscle,
the gamma neurons contract the spindle's intrafusal fibres in parallel,
so that the spindle keeps pace with the shortening muscle and remains sensitive
throughout the movement, able to detect any discrepancy between the intended and
the actual shortening.
This gives rise to the gamma loop, a route by which movement can be influenced
through the spindle: if the gamma neurons set the spindle to expect a certain
length, and the muscle fails to reach it — for instance against an unexpected load
— the spindle, being stretched relative to its setting, is excited,
and through the stretch reflex it excites the alpha motor neurons to contract the
muscle further, assisting the movement.
So the gamma loop allows the spindle to act as a feedback comparator,
automatically correcting for loads and errors.
So alpha-gamma co-activation is the activation of the gamma with the alpha motor
neurons in movement, keeping the spindle sensitive as the muscle shortens;
and the gamma loop is the route by which a discrepancy between the spindle's
setting and the actual muscle length excites the stretch reflex to assist the
movement — the spindle acting as a feedback comparator correcting for loads,
mechanisms by which movement is controlled through the spindle.
Describe spinal shock.
When the spinal cord is suddenly transected,
there follows a period in which the reflexes below the lesion are not exaggerated,
as the chronic picture would suggest,
but absent — spinal shock — and understanding this is important clinically and
illuminates the dependence of the cord on descending input.
The chronic effect of a complete cord transection is an upper motor neuron picture
below the lesion, with exaggerated reflexes and spasticity,
since the cord below is released from descending inhibition.
But immediately after a sudden, severe cord injury, there is, paradoxically,
a temporary state of spinal shock: below the level of the lesion,
all the cord's functions are depressed — the reflexes are absent or depressed,
the muscles flaccid, the tone lost, and the autonomic reflexes,
including those of the bladder and the blood vessels, are also depressed,
which can cause hypotension.
This depression is thought to result from the sudden withdrawal of the tonic,
facilitating input from the descending pathways,
on which the cord's neurons have come to depend for their normal excitability;
deprived of this, they are temporarily under-excitable.
Over a period of days to weeks, the spinal neurons recover their excitability and
indeed become hyperexcitable, and the reflexes return and then become exaggerated,
the chronic upper motor neuron picture developing.
So spinal shock is the temporary depression of all reflexes and functions below a
sudden cord transection — flaccidity, areflexia, lost tone,
and depressed autonomic reflexes with hypotension — from the sudden withdrawal of
the facilitating descending input on which the cord depends;
resolving over days to weeks as excitability recovers,
when the reflexes return and become exaggerated — important clinically and
illustrating the cord's dependence on descending input.
Describe the plantar response and the clinical examination of reflexes.
The examination of the reflexes is a fundamental part of the neurological
examination, and the plantar response in particular is a valuable sign,
the understanding of which follows from the reflex physiology and the distinction
of upper and lower motor neuron lesions.
The tendon reflexes — the knee jerk,
ankle jerk and others — are tested by tapping the tendon to evoke the stretch
reflex; their responses localise lesions:
they are exaggerated in upper motor neuron lesions, where the reflex is released,
and lost in lower motor neuron lesions, where the arc is broken,
and at the segmental level of a cord lesion.
The plantar response is tested by stroking the sole of the foot.
The normal response in the adult is a downward, flexor movement of the great toe.
The abnormal response — the extensor plantar,
or Babinski sign — is an upward movement of the great toe,
often with fanning of the other toes;
this is a sign of an upper motor neuron lesion,
of damage to the corticospinal tract.
It represents the release of a primitive flexion-withdrawal reflex normally
suppressed by the intact corticospinal tract — indeed it is the normal response in
infants before the corticospinal tract has matured.
So the reflexes are examined to localise lesions:
the tendon jerks exaggerated in upper and lost in lower motor neuron lesions;
and the plantar response — normally a downward,
flexor movement of the great toe — becoming extensor, the Babinski sign,
in an upper motor neuron lesion, representing the release of a primitive reflex
normally suppressed by the corticospinal tract — valuable signs following from the
reflex physiology.
Describe the spasticity of the upper motor neuron lesion and the clasp-knife
phenomenon.
The increased tone of the upper motor neuron lesion — spasticity — has
characteristic features, including its velocity-dependence and the clasp-knife
phenomenon, which follow from the stretch reflex and distinguish it from other
forms of increased tone, so they are worth describing.
Spasticity is the increased muscle tone that results from an upper motor neuron
lesion, arising from the release of the stretch reflex from the descending
inhibition that normally restrains it — so the stretch reflex becomes overactive,
and the muscle resists passive stretch excessively.
It has a characteristic, velocity-dependent quality:
the resistance to passive stretching is greater the faster the stretch is applied —
because the muscle spindle, and so the stretch reflex,
is sensitive to the rate of stretch; a slow movement may meet little resistance,
a fast one a marked resistance.
The clasp-knife phenomenon is a particular feature:
as a spastic muscle is stretched, the resistance increases at first, but then,
at a certain point, suddenly gives way and the resistance collapses — like the
blade of a clasp-knife — thought to be due to the inhibitory action of the Golgi
tendon organs or other receptors cutting in at high tension.
Spasticity is distinguished from the rigidity of basal ganglia disease,
which is not velocity-dependent. It is treated, when troublesome,
with antispastic drugs such as baclofen, which enhances inhibition, and dantrolene,
which acts on the muscle.
So spasticity is the increased tone of the upper motor neuron lesion,
from the release of the stretch reflex,
characteristically velocity-dependent — greater with faster stretch — with the
clasp-knife phenomenon of a sudden give-way at high tension;
distinguished from basal ganglia rigidity and treated with baclofen and dantrolene
— features following from the stretch reflex.
Describe the autonomic reflexes of the spinal cord — bladder and bowel control.
The spinal cord contains the reflex circuitry for the autonomic control of the
pelvic organs — the bladder and bowel — and an understanding of this is important,
since these functions are reflex but normally under voluntary control,
and are disturbed by cord lesions.
The bladder provides the clearest example. Its filling and emptying are controlled
by a spinal reflex, modulated by the brain.
As the bladder fills, the stretch of its wall is sensed and signalled to the sacral
cord, where a reflex — the micturition reflex — is organised: when triggered,
it causes, through the parasympathetic supply,
the contraction of the bladder wall and the relaxation of the internal sphincter,
producing emptying.
In the infant, this is a purely spinal reflex,
so the bladder empties automatically when full.
In the adult, the reflex is brought under the control of the brain,
which can inhibit or permit it, allowing the voluntary,
socially-appropriate control of micturition,
with the additional voluntary control of the external sphincter.
The bowel is similarly controlled by reflexes, modulated voluntarily.
After a spinal cord lesion above the sacral segments,
the voluntary control is lost, but the spinal reflex may remain or recover,
giving a reflex bladder that empties automatically;
while a lesion of the sacral segments themselves abolishes the reflex,
giving a flaccid bladder.
So the spinal cord contains the reflex circuitry for bladder and bowel control:
the bladder filling triggering a sacral micturition reflex causing its contraction
and emptying, which in the adult is brought under voluntary control by the brain;
a cord lesion above the sacral segments removing voluntary control but allowing a
reflex bladder, and a sacral lesion abolishing the reflex — autonomic reflexes of
importance in cord injury.
Describe the H-reflex and the use of reflexes in clinical neurophysiology.
The reflexes, and particularly the stretch reflex, can be studied electrically,
and the H-reflex is an important tool in clinical neurophysiology,
the understanding of which follows from the stretch reflex pathway,
so it is worth describing.
The H-reflex, named after Hoffmann,
is the electrical analogue of the stretch reflex,
elicited not by stretching the muscle but by electrically stimulating the sensory
afferent nerve from the muscle spindle.
A weak electrical stimulus to the mixed nerve preferentially excites the large
sensory afferents from the spindles; these,
through the monosynaptic stretch reflex pathway in the cord,
excite the motor neurons, producing a delayed muscle response — the H-reflex —
which can be recorded electrically.
It thus tests the stretch reflex arc electrically.
By studying the H-reflex — its threshold,
size and how it is modulated — the excitability of the motor neurons and the reflex
pathway, and their control by descending and other influences, can be assessed;
it is used in research and in the clinical assessment of the reflex pathways and of
conditions affecting motor neuron excitability, such as spasticity.
With a stronger stimulus, the motor axons are directly excited,
producing a direct muscle response,
and the relationship of the two responses is informative.
So the H-reflex is the electrical analogue of the stretch reflex,
elicited by electrically stimulating the spindle afferents,
which excite the motor neurons through the monosynaptic reflex pathway to produce a
recordable muscle response; used in clinical neurophysiology to assess the
excitability of the motor neurons and the reflex pathway and its control — a tool
following from the stretch reflex arc.
Describe the brainstem reflexes and their clinical importance.
Besides the spinal reflexes, there are important reflexes organised in the
brainstem, mediated by the cranial nerves, and these are of great clinical value,
particularly in assessing the comatose patient, so they are worth describing.
The brainstem reflexes are reflexes whose arcs run through the brainstem,
with cranial nerves as their afferent and efferent limbs.
Several are clinically important. The pupillary light reflex — the constriction of
the pupil to light — tests the pathway through the midbrain.
The corneal reflex — the blink in response to touching the cornea — tests a pathway
through the pons, with the trigeminal nerve as the afferent and the facial as the
efferent. The gag reflex tests the lower brainstem.
The vestibulo-ocular reflex, and the related caloric responses,
test the connections between the vestibular system and the eye movements through
the brainstem. The jaw jerk is a stretch reflex of the masseter,
mediated entirely by the trigeminal nerve.
The clinical value of these reflexes is great:
because each tests a particular level of the brainstem,
their systematic examination in the unconscious patient allows the integrity and
the level of brainstem function to be assessed — essential in evaluating coma and,
when all are absent along with other criteria,
in the determination of brainstem death.
So the brainstem reflexes — the pupillary light, corneal, gag,
vestibulo-ocular and jaw-jerk reflexes — run through the brainstem via the cranial
nerves, each testing a particular level;
their examination assessing the integrity and level of brainstem function,
essential in evaluating the comatose patient and in determining brainstem death —
reflexes of great clinical importance.
Describe the descending control of spinal reflexes.
The spinal reflexes, though organised within the cord,
are not fixed but are continuously regulated by the descending pathways from the
brain, and understanding this descending control explains how the reflexes are
adapted to behaviour and how they are disturbed in disease.
The reflex circuits of the cord — the stretch reflex, the withdrawal reflexes,
and the rest — are subject to powerful control from the descending pathways,
which act on the motor neurons, the gamma neurons and, especially,
the interneurons of the reflex arcs, to facilitate or inhibit the reflexes.
This control serves several purposes.
It adjusts the reflexes to the behavioural context: the gain of the stretch reflex,
and so the muscle tone, is set according to the postural and movement requirements,
by the brainstem pathways and the gamma system;
the withdrawal reflexes can be suppressed or facilitated according to circumstances.
It allows the reflexes to be incorporated into voluntary movement,
the descending commands and the reflexes acting together.
And it normally restrains the reflexes within useful limits.
The importance of this descending control is shown by what happens when it is
removed, as by an upper motor neuron lesion:
the released reflexes become exaggerated — the spasticity,
the hyperreflexia and the extensor plantar of the upper motor neuron syndrome.
So the spinal reflexes are continuously controlled by the descending pathways,
which act on the motor neurons, the gamma neurons and the interneurons to
facilitate or inhibit them — adjusting them to the behavioural context,
setting the tone, and incorporating them into voluntary movement;
their release by an upper motor neuron lesion causing the exaggerated reflexes and
spasticity — a descending control adapting the reflexes to behaviour and disturbed
in disease.
Describe the muscle tone changes and posturing as localising signs.
The pattern of muscle tone and of any abnormal posturing is, like the reflexes,
a valuable localising sign in neurology,
following from the organisation of the motor pathways and their control of tone,
so it is worth drawing together as a clinical application.
The tone, and any abnormal posture,
reflect the balance of the influences on the lower motor neuron and the stretch
reflex, and so are altered characteristically by lesions at different levels.
A lower motor neuron lesion, breaking the reflex arc,
causes a loss of tone — flaccidity — with the other lower motor neuron signs.
An upper motor neuron lesion, releasing the stretch reflex,
causes spasticity — the velocity-dependent increase in tone — with hyperreflexia
and the extensor plantar.
A basal ganglia disorder causes rigidity — an increased tone present throughout the
movement, not velocity-dependent, sometimes with a ratchet-like, cog-wheel quality.
A cerebellar lesion causes reduced tone — hypotonia.
In severe brain injury, the abnormal postures of decorticate and decerebrate
rigidity indicate the level of the lesion. So the assessment of the tone and
posture, together with the reflexes and the pattern of weakness,
allows the lesion to be localised.
So the muscle tone and posturing are localising signs:
flaccidity from a lower motor neuron lesion,
spasticity from an upper motor neuron lesion,
rigidity from a basal ganglia disorder, and hypotonia from a cerebellar lesion,
with decorticate and decerebrate posturing indicating the level of severe brain
injury; the pattern of tone, with the reflexes and weakness,
localising the lesion — a clinical application following from the motor pathways
and their control of tone.
Describe the contribution of reflexes to standing and the maintenance of posture.
The maintenance of an upright posture against gravity, as in standing,
is achieved largely automatically by reflexes,
and understanding how draws together the reflex mechanisms in a function of
everyday importance.
Standing requires the antigravity muscles — chiefly the extensors of the legs and
trunk — to maintain a sustained contraction to support the body against gravity,
and to make continuous adjustments to keep the centre of gravity over the base and
prevent falling.
This is achieved by reflexes rather than by conscious effort.
The stretch reflex is fundamental: any tendency to sag or sway stretches the
antigravity muscles, and the stretch reflex automatically contracts them to resist,
providing the postural tone and the automatic correction.
These reflexes are supported and coordinated by the brainstem postural mechanisms —
the vestibulospinal and reticulospinal pathways — which set the tone of the
antigravity muscles and integrate the postural adjustments,
using information from the vestibular system about the position of the head,
from vision, and from the proprioceptors about the position of the body.
The result is a continuous, automatic postural control,
with the reflexes making the moment-to-moment corrections and the higher centres
setting and adapting them.
So standing is maintained by reflexes:
the stretch reflex providing the postural tone and automatically contracting the
antigravity muscles to resist any sag or sway,
coordinated by the brainstem postural pathways using vestibular,
visual and proprioceptive information; a continuous,
automatic postural control drawing together the reflex mechanisms in the everyday
function of standing upright against gravity.
Describe habituation and sensitisation of reflexes as simple forms of learning.
Reflexes, though stereotyped, are not entirely fixed but can be modified by
experience through the simple forms of learning known as habituation and
sensitisation, and these are worth describing as the elementary forms of learning,
studied in the reflex.
Habituation is the decrease in a reflex response that occurs when a stimulus is
repeated many times without consequence:
a mild stimulus that initially evokes a response evokes progressively less as it is
repeated and found to be harmless — the nervous system learning to ignore an
inconsequential, familiar stimulus.
It is the simplest form of learning,
and is mediated by a decrease in the effectiveness of the synaptic transmission in
the reflex pathway.
Sensitisation is the opposite: an increase in the response to a stimulus,
occurring after a strong or noxious stimulus,
which enhances the responses to subsequent stimuli — the nervous system becoming
more responsive after a significant or threatening event.
It is mediated by an enhancement of synaptic transmission in the pathway.
These simple forms of learning, studied in the reflexes of simple animals,
have illuminated the synaptic mechanisms of learning generally — showing that
learning involves changes in the strength of synapses — the same principle,
of synaptic plasticity, that underlies more complex learning and memory,
and indeed the sensitisation of pain.
So habituation is the waning of a reflex to a repeated, inconsequential stimulus,
and sensitisation the enhancement of responses after a strong or noxious stimulus;
the simplest forms of learning, mediated by decreases and increases in synaptic
effectiveness in the reflex pathway — illuminating the synaptic basis of learning
generally, the same plasticity underlying memory and the sensitisation of pain.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, A reflex is an automatic, stereotyped response via a reflex arc of five
components: receptor, afferent neuron, integrating centre (cord/brainstem),
efferent neuron, effector — ranging from monosynaptic to multisynaptic.
Reflexes are the elementary units of nervous function and motor control.
Second, The stretch reflex (simplest, monosynaptic):
the muscle spindle (parallel to fibres,
senses length/stretch) excites the same muscle's motor neurons to contract and
resist stretch — the basis of clinical tendon jerks, maintaining tone and posture.
The gamma motor neurons innervate the spindle's intrafusal fibres and are
co-activated with alpha (alpha-gamma co-activation),
keeping the spindle taut/sensitive as the muscle shortens and setting reflex
sensitivity/tone.
Third, The Golgi tendon organ (in tendon, in series,
senses tension) inhibits the same muscle's motor neurons via an inhibitory
interneuron when tension is high — the inverse stretch reflex (autogenic
inhibition), protective and regulatory.
With the length-sensing spindle, it gives information on both muscle length Fourth,
Flexion withdrawal reflex (polysynaptic):
withdraws a limb from a noxious stimulus (excites flexors, inhibits extensors);
the crossed extensor reflex simultaneously extends the opposite limb to bear weight
— illustrating spinal integration.
Reciprocal innervation (antagonist inhibited when agonist activated) is mediated by
inhibitory interneurons; the cord's interneurons perform much motor integration and
are the targets of descending pathways (e.g. Renshaw cells — recurrent inhibition).
Fifth, Muscle tone (resting resistance to stretch) arises from the stretch reflex,
set by gamma neurons and descending pathways.
Disorders localise: spasticity (UMN lesion releasing the reflex),
flaccidity (LMN lesion abolishing it), rigidity (basal ganglia),
hypotonia (cerebellar).
The spinal cord is an integrating centre,
not a mere conduit — descending pathways act largely on its interneurons and
gamma/alpha neurons.
Thank you. That concludes the station.